What is the CSS box model?
The CSS box model describes the rectangular boxes generated for elements, consisting of content, padding, border, and margin. It determines how space is allocated and how elements are displayed.

What is the difference between class and id selectors in CSS?
The id selector is unique to a single element on the page and is identified by #id, while the class selector can be applied to multiple elements and is identified by .class.

What is the z-index in CSS?
The z-index property controls the stacking order of elements on the page. Elements with a higher z-index value will appear in front of those with a lower value.

What are pseudo-classes in CSS? Provide an example.
Pseudo-classes are used to define the special state of an element, like when a user hovers over it. Example: a:hover applies styles when the user hovers over a link.

Explain the difference between position: absolute; and position: relative;.
position: absolute; positions an element relative to its closest positioned ancestor, while position: relative; positions an element relative to its normal position in the document flow.

What is Flexbox in CSS and how does it work?
Flexbox is a layout model that provides an easy and efficient way to align and distribute space among items in a container. The container uses display: flex;, and its children can be aligned using properties like justify-content, align-items, and flex-wrap.

What is the difference between inline, block, and inline-block elements?
inline elements take up only as much width as their content and do not start a new line. block elements take up the full width available and start on a new line. inline-block elements behave like inline elements but can have width and height applied.

What is the display: none; property in CSS?
display: none; removes an element from the document layout, making it invisible and not taking up space, while visibility: hidden; hides the element but still reserves space for it.

What is the purpose of the @media query in CSS?
@media queries are used to apply different styles based on the screen size, device type, or other conditions, making the website responsive.

What is the difference between em and rem units in CSS?
em is relative to the font-size of its closest parent or element, while rem is relative to the root element's (<html>) font size.



CSS Frameworks

Examples: Bootstrap, Foundation, Semantic UI.
They simplify styling and layout.
Universal Selector (*)

Selects all elements.
Used for global styling.
Ruleset in CSS

Contains selectors and declarations.
Defines styles for elements.
CSS Box Model Elements

Content, padding, border, margin.
Defines how elements are structured.
CSS3 vs CSS2

CSS3 has modules and better browser support.
Includes new selectors and features.
Ways to Add CSS to HTML

Inline (style=""), Internal (<style> tag), External (.css file).
External is best for reusability.
Advantages of CSS

Separates content and design.
Reusable styles reduce redundancy.
RGB in CSS

Red, Green, Blue color model.
Ranges from 0-255 for each color.
Purpose of CSS

Controls the appearance of websites.
Separates content from styling.
Class vs ID

Class (.) is reusable, ID (#) is unique.
Use classes for multiple elements.
Intermediate CSS Interview Questions

Z-index
Controls overlapping elements.
Higher values appear on top.

CSS Sprites Benefits
Reduces HTTP requests.
Improves page load speed.

Styling Multiple Elements
Use a comma: h2, h3 { color: red; }
Applies the same style to both.

Media Types in CSS
Print, screen, speech, etc.
Used for responsive design.

Control Image Repetition
background-repeat: no-repeat;
Prevents repeating background images.

Background Attachment Property
fixed keeps background still.
scroll moves it with content.

Font-Related Properties
font-size, font-family, font-weight.
Controls text appearance.

Contextual Selectors
Targets elements within a parent.
Example: div p { color: red; }.

Responsive Design
Adapts to different screen sizes.
Uses media queries and flexible layouts.

CSS Syntax
selector { property: value; }
Uses semicolons and curly braces.

CSS Limitations
Browser compatibility issues.
No parent selectors.

Ways to Include CSS
External, Internal, Inline, @import.
External is most efficient.

Types of CSS Selectors
Universal, Class, ID, Attribute.
Used for targeting elements.

CSS Preprocessors (SASS, LESS, Stylus)
Adds variables, nesting, functions.
Enhances CSS capabilities.

Viewport Units (VH/VW)
VH = viewport height.
VW = viewport width.

Reset vs Normalize CSS
Reset removes all default styles.
Normalize keeps consistency across browsers.

Block vs Inline vs Inline-Block
Block takes full width.
Inline only takes content width.

Browser Testing
Ensures compatibility.
Fixes layout inconsistencies.

Pseudo-Classes (:hover, :focus)
Target elements in specific states.
Example: a:hover { color: red; }.

CSS Units (px, em, %)
px is fixed.
em and % are relative.